---
layout: post
title: Conda 101
author: familyguy
comments: true
---

{% include post-image.html name="conda_logo.png" width="200" height="40" 
alt="Conda logo" %}


In previous posts, we mentioned parts of the Python ecosystem such as 
**pip** (package manager) and **virtualenv** (environment manager).

In this post, we are going to introduce [**conda**](https://conda
.io/docs/index.html), a powerful system that 
combines the above two functionalities.

# Preliminaries

The core Python language contains various features, e.g. iterables, that can be 
used to say, display the integers from one to ten:

{% highlight python %}
for i in range(1, 11):
    print(i)

{% endhighlight %}
    
Now suppose you wanted to calculate the square root of each of these integers. 
The core Python language cannot do this, you have to import the `math` module 
from the [Python standard library](https://docs.python.org/3/library/index.html)

{% highlight python %}
import math


for i in range(1, 11):
    print(math.sqrt(i))

{% endhighlight %}


(the standard library link above lists the modules it contains).

Now suppose you wanted to send an HTTP request (or achieve some other *common 
programming task*). You could do this using only the core Python language and 
standard library. However, typically, it is easier and more robust to use a 
 third-party package, e.g. **requests**
 
{% highlight python %}
import requests


r = requests.get('https://bbc.co.uk/')
print(r.status_code)
print(r.content)

{% endhighlight %} 
  
There are hundreds and thousands of such packages (some judgement is 
required to discern which ones are worth using, but usually not much).

The packages take the form of online repositories hosted on cloud 
platforms, e.g. [Python Package Index (PyPI),](https://pypi.python.org/pypi)
 [Anaconda Cloud,](https://anaconda.org/) and come with package 
managers, e.g. **pip** and **conda**.

*pip* is the package manager for packages hosted on *PyPI*. *Anaconda Cloud*
 supports multiple package managers. However, the most common two are *conda* 
 and *pip*. 

# Initial setup

On most Unix-like systems, Python and its standard library come pre-installed. 
Depending on the OS, some third-party packages may also come pre-installed.

To get a better idea of what **conda** is, let's first consider what you get 
with 
a clean Ubuntu install:

- package manager - none
- environment - one (global) 

The global environment contains usually two Python installations:

- Python 2.x.x - `/usr/bin/python` 
- Python 3.x.x - `/usr/bin/python3` 

in the form of binary executables.

Each is a Python interpreter and a standalone piece of software with its own
 functionality, e.g. `/usr/bin/python --help`, and usually run via the command 
 `python` or `python3`, which can be confirmed with `which python` or `which 
 python3`.

To list all pre-installed modules for say Python 3.x.x, `python3` then

{% highlight python %}
help('modules')
{% endhighlight %}

To list those part of the standard library, `ls /usr/lib/python3.5`,
 and to list the third-party ones, `ls /usr/lib/python3/dist-packages`.
 
 Any of the modules above will 'work out of the box', i.e.
 
{% highlight python %}
import <module>
{% endhighlight %}

allows you to start using that module's functionality straight away. This is 
because 
`/usr/lib/python3.5` and `/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages` are in Python's 
**module search path** which is one of the variables Python checks when 
it sees the `import` keyword.

To verify they are in the module search path,

{% highlight python %}
import sys


sys.path
{% endhighlight %}

# Installing conda

Follow the [conda installation steps](https://conda
.io/docs/user-guide/install/index.html). Amongst other things, this will:

- prepend `/my/path/to/anaconda3/bin` to `PATH`
- install in `/my/path/to/anaconda3/bin` software binaries that come 'for 
free' with conda, e.g. python, ipython, conda-build, conda-env, etc. (this 
means `python` now points to `my/path/to/anaconda3/bin/python`, `which 
python` to confirm).
- install in `/my/path/to/anaconda3/lib/python3.6` the Python standard 
library modules
- install in `/my/path/to/anaconda3/lib/python3.6/site-packages` 
default third-party modules
 
# Basic conda usage
 
 Firstly, let's evaluate what installing conda has done in terms of our 
 clean Ubuntu install. 
 
 Before installing conda, we had the following situation:
 
- package manager - none
- environment - one (global)

Now, after installation:

- package manager - conda
- environment - one (conda `root`)

In some senses, the conda `root` environment has usurped the previous 
global
 environment. But fear not, it has done so without interfering with any of 
 the previous Python-related setup and configuration, e.g. 
 `/usr/bin/python3` works just as before.

However, if you're used to **virtualenv**, you might expect to see something
like 

`(root) joe@n24-25bu:~/Documents`

rather than

`joe@n24-25bu:~/Documents`

Nonetheless, you can confirm you are in the conda `root` environment with `conda 
info --envs`

```
# conda environments:
#
root                  *  /my/path/to/anaconda3
```

where the asterisk indicates the `root` environment is currently activated.

Further, `conda list` brings up the pre-installed standard library and 
third-party modules in `/my/path/to/anaconda3/lib/python3.6` as well as the 
Python interpreter in `/my/path/to/anaconda3/bin`.

As a rough rule of thumb, the conda `root` environment should not be used for 
anything.

Thus the next thing to do (and whenever you start a new project) is create 
a new environment

`conda create --name <myenv>`

You can check it is there with `conda info --env`.

This new environment `<myenv>` is **completely empty**. If you run `source 
activate <myenv>` then `conda list`, you should see

```
# packages in environment at /my/path/to/anaconda3/envs/<myenv>:
#
```

To delete an environment, `conda remove --name <myenv> --all`.

In the next post, we will go through installing packages in this empty 
environment and how to start using it.

**P.S.**

Even though `<myenv>` is an empty environment, commands like `python`, 
`ipython`, `pip`, `wheel` still work in it.

This is because when conda 
sees these executables aren't available in the currently activated 
environment, it looks in the conda `root` environment and points to the
executables found there.

This can be misleading, e.g. 

```
joe@n24-25bu:~$ source activate <myenv>
(<myenv>) joe@n24-25bu:~$ pip install <mypackage>
```

installs `<mypackage>` to the conda `root` environment and not `<myenv>`.

The correct way to do this is to first install `pip` in `<myenv>`:

`conda install --name <myenv> pip`

Now, `conda list` will show pip. Also,

`which pip`

should point to

`/my/path/to/anaconda3/envs/<myenv>/bin/pip` rather than 
`/my/path/to/anaconda3/bin/pip` like before.

Finally,

`pip install <mypackage>`.
